[dramatic music]
- Tonight, "Forged in Fire"
is going bigger...
*
As in global.
- Poland, go fight.
And I will fight.
- Four of the best bladesmiths
from around the world--
Argentina, France, Poland,
and the United States,
going head-to-head...
- I plan on giving 110%
to see that the USA wins this.
- Smith against smith...
- Ah...
- Country against country.
- I'm gonna win. [laughs]
- With national pride
on the line,
who will earn the right
to be crowned the first
"Forged in Fire"
international champion?
[dramatic music]
*
- My name is Michael Trollsky.
I'm from Poland and I'm 36.
Everybody calls me
Trollsky because trolls
are big, ugly creatures.
It's universal nickname.
I am very proud that
I can represent Poland,
but there is a pressure.
I am thinking about this,
but I will do my best.
- My name is Julien Maniglier.
I come from France
and I'm 43 years old.
When I received the invitation
from "Forged in Fire,"
I just couldn't believe it.
[blows raspberries]
[stammers]
It's amazing.
So everything's possible.
- I'm JW Randall,
I'm 58 years old,
and I'm from
Keithville, Louisiana.
I'm very competitive,
always have been.
I plan on giving 110%
to make my country proud.
We're gonna have fun,
but we're gonna go
as hard as we can go.
- Mi nombre  Guillermo Mendoza.
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to our Forge.
Today the four of you
will represent
your respective countries:
Poland, France,
the United States of America,
and Argentina,
in a competition
for $10,000 U.S.
and the title
of "Forged in Fire"
international champion.
You're about to experience
a competition in three rounds
designed to test every aspect of
your bladesmithing capabilities.
At the end of each round,
you will present your work
to our panel of expert judges.
Let's meet them now.
ABS Mastersmith J. Neilson,
historic weapons recreation
specialist David Baker,
and last, edged weapons
specialist Doug Marcaida.
Perhaps you've noticed
on your anvils is a drop cloth.
Feel free to lift that up.
In the first round
of this competition,
you will forge your blades
from a sphere of 52100 steel.
Keep in mind that
in the second round,
you'll be attaching handles
to those blades
to turn them
into fully-functional weapons
that will then be tested
for strength and durability
in a log chop
and for edge retention,
in an apple slice.
We're going to give you four
hours to complete your work.
Oh, wait,
there's one more thing.
You may have noticed
that the Forge
is conspicuously
absent of tongs.
Instead,
we're gonna give you this.
You may use the steel
from that bucket to forge tongs.
- I've never forged tongs.
I don't know.
Surprise, surprise, surprise.
- Keep in mind that
when the clock hits zero
and your blades
have been inspected,
one of you will have
to surrender your work
and leave the Forge.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your four hours starts now.
[rock music]
- Okay, guys.
- "Forged in Fire."
- All right, good.
- How come we never do that?
[clanging]
- I feel shocked.
I'm a bladesmith,
not a toolmaker,
so I never made a pair of tongs.
Because the challenge is to
chop wood and slice some apples,
I will make a big chopper.
Chopper is a kind of blade
that never failed me.
[speaks Polish]
It means:
"Poland, go fight"...
and I will fight.
- All of this steel
is mild steel.
This is just a matter of shaping
and piecing things together.
- Low carbon,
you can beat on it cold.
It doesn't matter.
- If they're smart,
they'll make tongs
with long jaws,
so as that ball bearing
gets thinned out,
they can adjust the tongs
to match the thickness.
*
Guillermo is dropping the hammer
of the gods from the sky.
- That whole anvil
is gonna get a headache.
*
- So I'm finishing
the tong because I need--
it has to be round to catch it.
It's really hard to catch,
so I need this.
Look, there.
Because of the test,
I'm leaning more towards
a camp knife.
[laughs]
Oh.
I'm very proud to be
the first French person
to pave the way for the others.
Yeah.
Ah, [bleep].
I take my tong,
try to catch the ball,
and it break.
Crap.
- So Julien has to remake
another section of tongs,
and his steel has just been
sitting in his forge.
Too thin.
both: Yeah?
- My plan is to get the ball
bearing in the forge
as quickly as possible,
and I'm gonna have to get
those tongs made to do it.
*
It's been a while
since I made some tongs.
I mean, it's got to a be
big enough opening
that it'll hold that ball.
That's the tricky part about it.
I'm gonna design a camp knife
and make it heavy enough
to chop wood
and still thin enough
on the edge to slice the apples.
I'm a little bit
behind on the tongs.
Other than that, everything's
going according to plan.
*
- Bladesmith,
one hour has elapsed.
You have three hours remaining
to finish your work.
- Hey, Guillermo.
[kisses]
- Guillermo
has completed his tongs.
- He could probably make tongs
for everybody
and not sweat it too much.
*
- Nice.
[groans]
- Yours are beautiful.
Mine are ugly as I am.
- [laughs]
So now my tongs are done.
I love it.
My ball is hot.
Go to Big Blue.
When I start to hit
with the hammer,
I can't hold it with my tongs.
It's moving in all direction.
That's the first
real frustration.
*
There is no time
for experimenting here.
That is why I use
only press today.
You want the press?
- Yeah.
- Please, sir.
I know Julien from today,
but I feel like
I know him for ten years.
I come after you.
- Okay.
- There is cooperating
and not competing.
Don't turn it off.
- Okay.
- No pressure of competition,
just friendship.
- Tell me when you're ready.
- Ready.
- Okay.
- This is the only competition
that I'm aware of
that not only do
the contestants get along,
but they're always helping
each other out, too.
- [laughs]
You got a round there.
- Blech.
*
- [bleep].
The tongs are taking me a while,
and I'm struggling with it.
I came up with cutting
a notch into the tongs
so that I could hold the bar
with some leverage.
That's the whole problem,
just containing it.
*
I want that steel to heat up,
and it's not being
my friend at all.
It's not getting hot
fast enough.
- It's got to be making
JW sweat knowing that
everybody else has had
their steel in the fire.
His tongs aren't working out
the way he was hoping.
Now he's just got to stand there
and wait for that steel to heat.
It's got to drive you crazy.
- How are things?
- Uh, rough.
- We are running out of time.
- Yeah.
*
- I don't think Guillermo's
broken a sweat yet.
- Why would he?
- Is Guillermo using
a small hammer,
or is he just a big man?
- Uh, both.
- [laughs]
Oh, la la.
- What is wrong?
*
- I think it's a crack.
- Take it to the grinder.
- Yeah.
- Uh-oh.
- Hearing that?
- I heard something about grind.
There's something that Julien's
hoping he can grind out.
*
- It's a crack.
- It's a crack?
- Look.
- [bleep].
- I think he's got a crack
in that steel.
So I grind and grind and grind,
and I flip it over...
[groans, laughs]
The crack's superficial.
It is gone.
- High five.
- Yeah, man.
- Okay, so round one of our
first international competition.
How these guys looking?
- I'd like to see Michael
get back in this game.
- Yeah.
- I constantly
have to fix my tongs.
The quality of grip
is really, really low.
*
[groans]
- I want to see Michael
just draw a knife
profile on that big slab.
- He is. [laughs]
- He is! Okay, there it is.
He is drawing it.
[laughter]
*
- I decide to grind
the shape of my knife
from a billet
instead of forging it.
Yeah.
It's my competition now.
You want to fight?
*
- I think JW's gonna go back
to Louisiana
and kiss all of his tongs.
- Tongs from hell.
Every time I take the steel
out of the forge,
I am slipping
and trying to re-grip.
[bleep].
I'm feeling a little bit behind.
I do.
I make a decision
to leave my blade bevels
a little thicker and grind.
- Well, now that JW's
gotten away from those tongs,
he's doing a lot better.
- I'm absolutely gonna be doing
everything I can to see
that the USA wins this.
*
- Guillermo is so
ahead of the game.
Wow.
- And here's the question.
Do you think
Guillermo's gonna quench early
and then grind?
- Oh, that would be amazing.
*
I can see the warp from here.
- Yeah, you can see a bow
in the middle of his blade.
- That scares me.
- So Guillermo lays his blade
on the cold anvil stand.
Is that gonna pull the warp
that he's fighting?
- It can.
Just like us, you know,
we pull away from the heat.
Steel actually does
the same thing.
- [vocalizing]
*
- Julien's a bit of a showman.
- Yeah, it's a good show.
- Yeah.
- My blade is basically
finished.
So put under the fire.
When the edge is
at the right temperature,
I'll do my quench.
It's now or never.
Put it into the oil
and leave it into the oil.
- So you are finished?
- My blade is cooling down.
Where are you?
It could bend.
It could break.
Here you are.
It could jump and run away.
*
That's good.
Whoo-hoo.
- So Michael
has yet to heat-treat,
and JW has yet
to heat-treat.
- If you screw
the heat treatment.
You have a piece of junk
with a nice-looking handle.
- We'll see what happens here.
- Put it in there.
- It's very, very hot.
*
And it's in the quench.
- All right,
moment of truth for Michael.
- I have a little bending,
but if I reach
the second phase, I will fix it.
- You have just 15 minutes
remaining in this round.
- 52100 steel
doesn't move fast.
- Of course,
all eyes are on JW.
- And I am
hogging the grinder.
- All right,
that's enough, JW, Come on.
*
- Going for the edge quench.
- I'm fine with that.
*
- If JW develops a warp
in the quench,
he won't have that
much time to correct it.
- No, no, not at all.
Nice, we got a quench.
- This is kind of
a make-or- break moment
for JW, right here.
- Yeah, it is.
*
That sucker is hard.
- Nice job.
- Thank you, buddy.
It was a fight.
- Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five, four,
three, two, one.
Bladesmiths, shut down
your machines, drop your tools.
Return to your anvils.
Round one of this international
competition is over.
- Whoo-hoo!
- I knew that I was behind,
but I came to conquer,
so I was forced
to paw and chew to the end.
- I see Julien's blade.
It looks really good,
like a pirate.
Julien the pirate.
*
- Bladesmiths,
round one is complete,
and now it's time
for the judges
to take a closer
look at your work.
Guillermo,
you're up first.
Please present
your weapon to the judges.
*
- I really enjoyed
watching you forge.
Your control was fantastic
and the power
that you put into the strikes
and the accuracy.
I think we need to rename
Big Blue Guillermo.
- [laughs] Thank you.
- You had a slight warp
in the blade
that you were fighting.
It's right up here,
but very nice,
very clean work.
- Thank you so much.
- JW, you're up.
Please present
your work to the judges.
- JW, I really like this.
Having issues
with the tongs in the beginning
so it kind of
slowed you up a bit,
but using the torch
to edge quench this
so you get the hard edge
and the soft spine is fantastic.
You do have
one spot right in here
where you've got
a bit of a drop,
but all in all,
very nicely done.
- Thank you.
- Julien, please present
your work to the judges.
- First off, Julien,
you had so much fun out there.
We know that people
who have fun do their best work.
- Yeah.
- Nice design.
I like that sweeping feel
for chopper and a slasher
with your blade.
- My only concern is,
there's so much weight here
and nothing back here.
Yeah, I like to see a little bit
more here in the handle,
but it's a pretty piece.
- Thank you.
- Michael, you're up.
*
- This thing is a devastator.
Very nice setup for a handle.
The microfractures--
but what I can't see,
because the forge scale
is still here,
how deep they go.
They might be right
within the ability
to just grin
that spine down
and lose those,
but there's no way I can tell.
- Thank you.
- All right, bladesmiths,
the judges have to go
into deliberation,
so I'll need you to step
off the Forge floor.
*
- [groans]
Okay, judges,
we're gonna start with
Guillermo's blade
on the end.
- Guillermo did
a beautiful job on this.
You know, it's light enough
that it's gonna be fast,
but it's got enough
of a spine there
that it should be plenty strong.
- Guillermo Big Blue.
[laughter]
- He was fighting
a bit of a warp
during that heat treat,
so it looks like
he got most of it out,
but the rest could
actually be ground out.
- All right, Doug, we're gonna
move on to JW's blade.
- That's one of
the nicest camp knives
I've seen over here.
The fact that he did
an edge quench is awesome
because that shows
that he understood
to keep this soft
like a shock absorber
for when we're doing the chop.
- Your technique was
really nice to watch.
- Thank you.
- Really.
- I love how the colors define
what's going on in this blade.
You can see, that's your hard
edge taking that torch,
so that stuff is hard as can be.
Now you got the blue.
That's softer,
but you get the third,
that purple color.
That's what you look for,
the colors.
- Okay, let's move on
to our next bladesmith, Julien.
- [exhales sharply]
I'm stressed.
- Julien gave us a very nice
competition cutter.
He's got enough mass in here
if he brings these grinds
all the way up.
He's got fantastic
edge geometry.
- Biggest concern, he's gotten
very thin here in the handle.
I'm not sure how he's gonna
make this handle work
with so much blade up front.
- Let's move on to our last
bladesmith, Michael.
- I like that design.
I wouldn't change a thing,
but the biggest issue,
of course, are the cracks
that we see right here
on the spine.
When you chop into wood,
that could travel up to there
and either open up the cracks
or possibly break the blade.
- They are keeping
my knife for too long.
- [laughs]
- Honestly, if he cut
a 1/2 inch off the back
of this thing
and made it into an actual seax,
this would be a wicked piece.
- It's that time.
Doug, have you made
your final decision?
- Yes, I have.
- Dave?
- Yep.
- J.?
- Yeah.
- Let's go tell our smiths.
- Bladesmiths, forging weapons
is an art and science
shared by all cultures
and peoples.
This international competition
brought the world together
in this forge.
Dziekuje ci,
merci beaucoup,
thank you very much,
and muchas gracias.
- Bladesmiths,
it's that time.
*
The bladesmith leaving
the Forge is...
*
Michael, your blade
did not make the cut.
David Baker will explain.
- Michael,
you turned in a blade
that we all wanted
to chop something with,
but we couldn't overlook
that pronounced warp
in your blade
and those fractures
along the back edge.
For that,
we've got to let you go.
- Michael,
please surrender your blade.
*
- Deeply in my heart
I feel disappointment.
I came here
to represent Poland, so...
What not kill you
will make you stronger.
*
- Bladesmiths, you've made it
to the second round.
Poland is out,
and it's down to France,
United States, and Argentina.
Now that your blades
have been tempered,
it's time to turn them
into fully-functional weapons
by attaching handles to them
using the range of materials
provided in our pantry.
You will have three hours
to complete this challenge.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your three hours starts now.
I think that Guillermo
and JW have by far
the most developed blades,
and Julien still needs
to work on his
a little bit, correct?
- Yeah.
[air hissing, pops]
- The fact that he's trying
to go for perfection is amazing,
'cause even that little bend
was--you know,
it's not that critical.
*
- You know what I really like
about Julien's blade?
That came straight out
of his imagination.
- It's got a character
to it too.
- Right.
- I start to shape my handle
so that it's ergonomic
for the judges.
- It's nice to see he's
re-profiling that finger notch.
- Nice if it was
more subtle.
*
- I realize that actually
the geometry of my blade
is a little too wide
to be effective
on the apple slice.
- It's like
he's steering a boat.
- [humming]
- So now it's getting
very technical.
*
- The right here side
of the ricasso
was a little bit thick
where the transition
from the tang
into the blade is.
- JW's blade grinds
were beautiful.
- I'd love to see him
just increase
the distal taper
a little bit.
- Next I'm working on
cleaning up the profile
of the blade a little.
Guillermo, this is tough.
I feel like it's really
interesting to me
that you can be
from different countries
and bring everybody together,
and it's really cool
when you don't even
understand the language,
and you're still
sharing and improving.
*
- Guillermo's trying to drill
through his tang right now.
*
- That drill bit,
once it hits the metal,
you're gonna end up
with a dark ring around there,
so not gonna be
as tight a fit.
Now there's a hole made
into the surface,
it's an easy place
for that fracture to begin.
- Yeah.
- Here we go.
- Oh, this is the perfect time
for the end of that handle
to snap.
- Oh, [bleep].
- Guillermo's trying
to drill through
the tang of his blade.
- The bit was going up
into the chuck.
- So Guillermo's not
making any headway.
- Oh, is he just gonna
fill it with epoxy?
- You do what you got to do,
I guess.
- So Guillermo basically
has a false panel
on one side of his blade.
- Yeah.
- That's an inlay now
and no mechanical connection.
- We've seen what happens
on a strength test
when you've got air pockets
and a hidden tang.
Those tend to fracture.
*
- We've got paracord
and paracord.
- Yeah, buddy.
- I know those are
your favorite, too, J.
- Yeah, well,
there's not a lot of grinding
and whatnot involved in that.
- It's gonna be interesting.
You think Julien will go
for a French braid?
[laughter]
- It's important to me to make
a handle out of paracord.
It's something
I master very well.
It is also
a part of my style.
*
- I'd like to be a fly
on the wall in Julien's forge,
the conversations that
he must have with himself,
both in English and French.
*
- JW has cleaned up his blade,
he's got his scales
glued on there,
he's drilling out the holes,
Nothing fancy, just a handle.
- Clean and classic.
Nothing wrong with that.
- Easy now.
*
I finish the pins out
with the slack belt
and get them smoothed off
where they're blended
back to the wood.
Oh, my goodness.
Time is running out
and I know I'm running
the clock to the very end,
but all I need to do
is just some final finish,
and then I'm good to go.
*
- Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one.
Bladesmiths, your time is up.
This round is over.
[applause]
- Time is up.
[exhales dramatically]
I have a bad feeling because
they've done such nice blade,
so I'm a bit anxious.
*
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to our strength test,
the log chop.
I'm gonna take
each of your knives,
and I'm gonna deliver
ten strikes
into this very
impressive chunk of wood.
How far I get
into the log, I don't care.
What I want to see is what the
log is gonna do to your knife
and how it's gonna hold up.
Julien, you ready?
- Oui. [speaks French]
- Yeah, okay,
I'll take that as a yes.
Let's see what it can do.
- The only thing
I can think about
is the fear
that my blade breaks.
*
[exhales]
- Julien,
you've got a razor here.
I mean, after ten blows,
there's not even
a shiny spot on here.
Great job on that.
One thing I didn't like,
though, is the handle.
It dug into my hand viciously.
Some kind of smoothed-out handle
with some contour to it
and a swell on the back,
that would've been
a huge difference.
But overall, your knife
held up very well.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- JW, how you feeling?
- Feeling good.
I am a little apprehensive,
mainly because the log chop
is the absolute worst thing
you can do to the blade.
You start having that
doubt creep in, you know.
*
- All right, JW,
I've been preaching something
for four seasons.
A knife does not have to be
thick and heavy to be strong.
This is light, and this is fast.
Not a blemish on it.
It just sunk into that wood.
The only thing I would've
liked is up in here,
just a little rounding on that.
Overall, great job.
- Thank you.
- Guillermo, listo?
- Listo.
*
- Guillermo, we've got an issue.
Guillermo, we've got an issue
with the handle.
When you were assembling
your handle,
not enough epoxy
got down in here.
You can see where
there's air cavities.
So, striking that log,
all that energy
transferring into the tang
just had nothing to support it,
so it fractured the wood out.
That being said, though,
your knife edge is beautiful.
Everything stayed straight.
The handle's the problem.
*
- Guillermo, your blade suffered
a catastrophic failure
in the handle
and can no longer be tested.
For that reason, we have to ask
you to please leave the Forge.
*
- Julien, JW, it's come down
to France and the United States
in our first-ever
international competition.
Now we're sending you back
to your home forges
to recreate an iconic
weapon from history.
Are you ready to see what it is?
- Not really.
- Well, that weapon is...
the spadroon.
*
Originally an English sword,
the spadroon gained popularity
among French and American
military officers
during 18th-century warfare.
As the official
British infantry sword,
it's broad fuller
made it light in weight,
while its sharp single edge
delivered swift
and fatal thrusts
across enemy lines.
The hilt of the spadroon
featured a decorative
five-balled guard
that served as
an embellishment
for European spadroons.
This became a regulation style
for the American military,
making it one of history's
most attractive
yet deadliest weapons.
After five days, you will return
and present your spadroons
to our panel of expert judges,
and only after
they've tested them
will they declare one of you
the very first international
"Forged in Fire" champion
and hand you that check
for 10 grand, U.S.
- Yeah.
- All right, bladesmiths,
good luck.
We'll see you in five days.
[dynamic music]
- We're here today in
the northwest corner
of the state of Louisiana.
Winning the international
competition
means more than anybody
could even know.
I am a patriot,
I mean, to the core.
I'm fired up.
We're gonna build a spadroon.
I've not done a sword this long,
but I'm gonna do a
ladder-pattern Damascus blade.
We got 31 layers
in this layup right here.
Right now we've got 62 layers.
We draw that bar back out
and put it back over on top
of itself to give us 124 layers.
I think the most
challenging aspect is,
this is a short amount of time
to build what
we're trying to build.
Absolutely
anything can happen.
I'm having to back way
out of what my norm is.
A little bit more
straightening on the bar
and then we're gonna
go over there
and start
knocking the highs off.
The grinding's gonna be
a lengthy process.
I hope I'm gonna have
enough time to finish.
*
- I'm happy to be home
in Saint-Sigismond in France.
Look at the nice view
behind us.
It's magnificent.
So I start to make my tip,
but I have to be really fast
because more you hit your blade,
less carbon you have.
*
It's like music.
[speaking French]
I love to do some music
with my hammer.
[hums, laughs]
It just get you some rhythm.
It's just more fun.
*
Today I did it all:
the tang, the tip, the blade.
All I have left is to
grind it a little bit,
and it's going very well.
[speaks French]
- I'm excited to get started
this morning.
Fixing to start
profiling everything,
so I'm gonna spend a bunch
of time with the grinder today.
With the length
of this blade, I mean,
it's like grinding
three 10-inch bowie knives.
You got a ton of work.
*
Just getting everything
rough ground out.
We're just about ready
to go to heat-treat on it.
Right now would be the time
for a little prayer.
The grinding process
was slower than
I would've liked for it to be,
so this is a short amount
of time left to heat-treat.
*
God.
I noticed it's curved
from the top down,
and it just--heart sinks.
I've got to do something
to correct this.
I know I can't fix it cold,
so we got to go back in
and heat-treat again.
I take it out of the oil,
and I've got the same thing,
and I'm thinking I'm gonna have
to regroup and start over.
*
- So, today I'm gonna work
to be ready for the quench.
The quench is important
because
if the quench is not good,
my blade's gonna be like butter,
and she gonna bend
at the first shot.
*
I think it bent.
Oh, [bleep].
I know that there's
a weak point on my blade
that would make the curve.
So I have to do a second one.
*
[blowing]
[whistles]
Boom.
*
Third quench,
this one goes down.
I don't want to
do another one.
*
[whistles]
I have to make another blade.
I have to restart everything.
Oh, [bleep] [bleep].
I don't want to do another
blade,
but I've got
my country behind me,
so I have to show them
that I respect them
and give the best.
Yeah.
*
- I thought about it a lot,
what happened yesterday.
I've got plenty to work with,
but I still got
a slight curve in the spine,
so what I'm gonna have to do
is grind that away.
*
It's going good.
As I'm grinding, I can tell
that thing's gonna be okay.
What a huge relief that is.
And now that
this blade issue is fixed,
I can focus on fit and finish.
What's challenging about it is
getting the sizing right
on it.
Instead of having
a round handle,
we're gonna have
an oval handle.
There's just
nothing comfortable
about a round handle
when you're striking
something on an angle.
Done deal.
I've got real high
expectations of it,
I really do.
I think it's gonna do well.
*
- I've done a new blade,
and the second one
is just better.
I'm really happy.
I got the banana.
You see?
So, today,
I have to make the D-guard,
make some branches, as well.
I can do a twist together.
It's gonna work.
[exhales]
I'm happy.
And now I have to do the
leather handle, and I'm done.
I've got 47 layers of leather,
but the leather's
not going down.
It's so sticky, so squeezy.
It doesn't move, so I have
to hammer to make it go down.
*
[groans]
[bleep].
But it's not important
for the blade,
so I'm still working on it,
but I feel like
I don't like it anymore,
so I'm [bleep] mad now.
[sighs]
*
- Bladesmiths, welcome back.
You are both one step closer
to the title of
our very first international
"Forged in Fire" champion.
Julien,
you went back to France.
How did it go?
- It was just
a beautiful nightmare.
*
I never done
one like this before.
It just pushed me
at the maximum of my skills.
- Tres bien.
All right, JW.
How'd it go for you?
- We were able to get it done.
*
I chose to do
ladder-pattern Damascus,
so I've got 124 layers.
It had some heat-treat issues,
but we worked through it.
Producing Damascus is what I do.
*
- Gentlemen, both of your
weapons look fantastic,
but now it's time
to see how they hold up
in our weapons test.
Up first, the kill test.
Doug?
*
- Bladesmiths, to find out
how lethal your weapons are,
I will deliver some slashes and
thrusts on these pig carcasses.
Julien, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- I think so.
- Let's do this.
- I'm French.
I'm representing my country,
so I'm panicking.
It's total panic.
*
- All right, Julien, let's talk
about your sword here.
It's a bit on the heavier side.
Your edge easily lacerates
into the pig carcass.
On the thrust,
it penetrates deep.
Your weapon definitely is sharp.
Your sword will kill.
- Thank you.
- JW, you're next.
Are you ready?
- I think so.
- Let's do this.
- I am really impressed
with Julien's blade.
His knife performed really well,
so I felt good for him,
and now I'm nervous for me.
*
- Okay, JW, let's talk
about your spadroon here.
The fact that you put a fuller
all the way through up here
lightened your sword a lot.
It is so sharp,
it almost cut all the way
through this carcass.
Overall, your weapon will kill.
- Thank you, Doug.
- Now, Donald McBane,
who wrote the book
on this weapon,
called it the shearing sword,
so to test the sharpness
of your blades,
I'll be chopping
through this rope
and then attacking these
sandbags as they fall.
Julien, you're up.
Are you ready?
- Oui.
- Okay.
*
- [exhales]
- I'll get him.
*
- Yes.
It's good.
- Good job.
- It's fricking good.
- Well, Julien, that's sharp.
It passed right
through the ropes.
through the bags.
But the weight in this sword
and the shape of its handle
just have a tendency
to be very hard to stop.
A little thinner handle
possibly,
a little more indexed...
- Yeah.
- Would've helped.
But it's definitely
a sharp sword.
- Thank you very much.
- Sir, you are next.
Are you ready?
- Yes, sir.
*
- [laughs]
- Definitely sharp enough
to cut through the ropes.
Your handle, would've been
nice to see it taper
and swell a little bit more,
but it's definitely a cutter.
- Thank you.
Thank you, Dave.
- Nicely done.
All right, gentlemen,
next up is the strength test.
- The strength test is where
everybody's stuff's
on the table.
- Now, to test the strength
and durability of your blades,
I'll be thrusting with the tip
and cutting into these hardwood,
leather-wrapped shields.
JW, are you ready for this?
- Yes, sir.
- Okay.
- After the first two tests,
I'm feeling pretty nervous.
They were pretty equal.
You don't have a clue to what's
going on at this point.
Lord, let it stay together.
[rock music]
*
- Well, everything on
the blade looks good.
Guard's still tight.
Handle hasn't moved.
I think you did a great job.
- Thank you, Dave.
- Julien, are you ready?
- Good luck.
[laughs]
[tense music]
*
[rock music]
- [sighs]
- So, Julien, we got
a very stout edge profile.
Blade's still straight.
Well done.
- Thank you so much.
*
- Julien, JW,
welcome back to the Forge.
The judges' deliberation
is complete.
Before I tell you what
their final answer is,
they have feedback
for both of you.
[tense music]
- JW, your sense of
scale and balance,
combined with that steel
you put in that blade,
just put together a weapon
that was a joy to use,
as well as to look at.
I think you did
a fabulous job with that.
- Thank you, Dave.
*
- Julien,
your spadroon is dangerous.
It's sharp.
It's strong.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Well, gentlemen,
the judges have made
their decision.
Our very first "Forged in Fire"
international champion is...
*
JW.
Congratulations.
You are our first
"Forged in Fire"
international champion.
Julien.
- Oui.
- Unfortunately,
your blade did not make the cut.
J. Neilson will explain.
- Julien, you brought us
a beautiful piece,
but compared
to your competitor,
your blade was a lot heavier
in the front balance-wise,
and with that round handle,
it made it a lot harder
to control in the testing.
That's why
we're gonna let you go.
- Julien, c'est finit, mon ami.
Please, surrender your weapon.
- Okay.
*
Thank you, guys.
I'm very proud of this blade,
but JW is a god.
He is a god in the forge.
*
And this guy is my friend.
- JW, the American
and our very first
"Forged in Fire"
international champion.
It's a title that also comes
with a check for $10,000.
Congratulations.
Please present your weapon
to the judges.
- I put forth
a lot of hard work, time,
and effort to reach this point,
so it's just been
an incredible honor
to be asked
to represent my country.
And not only that,
but being able to meet guys
from different parts
of the world
and the friendships
that we developed
was just a great experience,
and that's what
it's all about.
*